[Music]
good evening I'm Jackie Spade this is
FBC news tonight lambasa celebrates
fiji's gold medal win women dominate USP
graduation and students with special
needs obtain trade
skills
[Music]
a rugby Olympic gold medalist were
received by fully packed sell Park this
afternoon thousands of people from all
over Veno levo attended the national
celebrations in lambasa Elanor Tang VI
with this
[Applause]
report this is the reception our
national seven Heroes received as they
entered subel
Park
ask you all to give our boys another K
and another round of
applause N I want to start by thanking
uh thanking each and every one of you
for joining this celebration today a
celebration not only for our team's uh
magnificent achievement in Rio but what
it means for every Fijian because this
has been the proudest moment that any of
us can
remember the last time a celebration of
this magnitude happened here in lambasa
was in 2005 so after approximately 11
years Vu today witnessed a national
celebration as far as Seven's rugby is
concerned prime minister V Bim marama
says the win has not only only raised
our profile the world over but has made
us all fijians proud as it is evident in
the turnout
today I want to say to the team in front
of every northerner today thank you for
making us
proud thank
you thank you for filling us with
inspiration Thank You For Fighting our
imaginations about what a small nation
like Fiji can achieve working together
as a
team lank Leon nakarawa and team manager
Ro kesi who only arrived from Rio on
Wednesday Today received their $30,000
checks from the prime minister in front
of the thousands in
attendance I want to thank than thank uh
the government and the people of fij for
that but uh that's a I think a hard work
and sacrifice always pay off uh we've
been uh training houseart for a couple
of uh
couple I think from 3 years uh 3 years
back from when Ben came and then I think
everything pays off in real following
the official part of the victory
celebrations the public got a chance to
meet the National
Heroes it's a once in a lifetime
opportunity for the many who left home
as early as 4:00 a.m. today to just
catch a glimpse of their National s
Heroes elen FBC news the friendly
Northtown of lambasa literally Stood
Still today as people welcome fiji's
Olympic Champions shops and even
government departments released their
staff for a few hours to join in on the
celebrations Roland Cy with the
story from the minute the Seven's boys
touched down at the lambasa airport this
morning it was Party Time rugby fans
lined the side of the road with the hope
of getting a glimpse of their Heroes
while in town numbers were increasing as
people came in the bus loads from all
over Vu it was a reception like no other
with the players themselves overwhelmed
with the reception by the people of the
friendly
North uh thank God uh you never expected
this uh bigger than from sub and nii uh
this is exciting and uh crazy just crazy
what do you have to say to the people of
lambasa uh thank you very much for
supporting the team thank you very much
for coming in big numbers to support
them and uh the goal is for us
all young and old and from all walks of
life the streets of lambasa town was
painted blue as everyone danced and
shouted their congratulatory messages to
the boys good to be here and like M as
well like and9 uh this one is awesome uh
you are not expecting this uh looking at
the crowd looking at the crow knowing
that they are very supportive on the
very friendly love the entertainment put
on by the people of the bumber singer
was one of a kind the humor even spread
to Captain Courageous who for a few
minutes decided that he might also be
good as a
journalist how do you
feel super sub how do you feel about
this feel good very good how awesome
is you say much can't say much you going
to go home today or you going to stay
here go home
today on a serious note the captain was
humbled by the welcome accorded to him
and the boys in his earlier speech today
the f7s manager Rob kovesi said that the
campaign too began right here at Super
Park when they selected the first team
to take part in the Dubai sevens and it
was only fitting that the celebrations
ended right here for FBC news at Super
Park in lambasa I'm Roland
KY fbc's Victory Anthem go Fiji go has
taken the country by by storm initially
released during the beginning of the re
Olympics as FBC support for the sevens
boys the song's words and video were
tweaked to include the Olympic win and
as Roland Koy reports the song which
proved popular at the Nandan soua
celebrations was also a major hit with
people in the
[Music]
north go Fiji go a song produced by FBC
staff is already popular in lambasa the
song got the crowd jiving throughout the
celebration
and the reaction from those we spoke to
were the
[Music]
same good good very
nice very excitement and it's very good
it's wonderful superb superb superb my
brother
even the Fiji sevens Captain had his own
description of the victory Anthem what
do you think of that
song word on the street is that the FBC
Victory Anthem has been on the airwaves
in lambasa since it was produced and
will remain a national hit for as long
as the victory in Rio will be remembered
Roland KY FBC
news the majority of graduates from the
University of the South Pacific today
were females Vice Chancellor Professor
AES Chandra says this poses a challenge
to male students s boa has
more the head of the University proud to
see women leading the charge and calling
on male students to study harda 64% of
all those
graduating are
female
and this is 9% more than we had in our
April graduation and of course that is
something that we must
celebrate but it does pose a challenge
for the
males to improve their studies Professor
Chandra told the graduates to use their
knowledge to build their future and
become role models for their countries
20 graduates are from nonmember
countries Professor Chandra says USB
wants to be a destination of choice for
foreign
students for graduates it's year of hard
work finally paid off it's it's a honor
to graduate finally uh hard work and
dedication from my parents and myself I
finally paid off I'm happy to be one of
the graduates at here at University of
the South Pacific uh it's amazing it's
really amazing it's my first graduation
with the bachelor's degree in mechanical
engineering with my 996 students
graduating today USP is striving to be
the best in providing higher education
in the Pacific s boa FBC
news still to come on FBC news medical
professionals from the Pacific share
skills and knowledge an outgoing British
Envoy promises to return stay with
[Music]
us
for
[Music]
radi
welcome back this is FBC news medical
professionals from across the region are
attending the third annual scientific
conference in soua it's an Avenue for
the medical sector to discuss issues and
share skills for Quality Health Care
prita prash
reports the theme for this year's
conference is infectious diseases
threats and opportunities president
Major General retired Chon Ro
highlighted that diseases and outbreaks
are train on the economy but also
provides a challenge to improve the
health care services focus on the health
sector is essentially on reposition the
country's health system not only to
cater for the increased demands for
improved Health Care driven by improving
soci economic status also importantly to
put in place appropriate approaches to
preventative and Curative measures in Du
of this our health authorities are
receptive to new ideas and proposal that
will assist in achieving targeted
outcomes and National goals the
president of internal medicine
organization of the Pacific is hoping
for positive outcomes from the to-day
conference we should be the voice to
positively influence the direction of
health and diseases in the Pacific
Islands the next two days are filled
with good topics that are very relevant
and important to all of us and I'm
confident that we will all come out of
this much better equipped and
knowledgeable in these areas the
Ministry of Health and Medical Services
is also developing a policy framework to
guide and improve Medical Services
across the country ranita prash FBC news
the nandi center for special education
had its first graduation ceremony for
vacational students accredited with
certificates from Fiji National
University 13 students completed 11
weeks of training in woodwork joinery
use of power tools and other skills
Ellen stalls has the
story rashne Dei is a proud mother
seeing her sons graduate one with honors
topping his class despite the family's
financial
difficulties to all parents who have
special children you need to know that
these children need extra love and
attention from their parents then only
will they know their parents really care
for them and do not neglect them for
20-year-old senati DBU communication is
a problem but his mother olila says he
has always been skilled with his
hands sometimes it's hard because we
can't understand what he is saying but
completing this course has proved that
he can do it parents and Guardians at
the graduation ceremony were reminded of
just how crucial their roles are in
helping their children achieve their
goals most most important aspect of
training
is to
try and give an opportunity for these
young graduates to be independent in
life graduates here today have been
given qualifications to be able to enter
the workforce and contribute positively
to society hopefully this is a sign of
more such causes to come for children
with special needs Ellen stalls FBC
news over 100 students graduated from
the Fiji National University's
Apprenticeship Training Program this
afternoon the students walked away with
a certificate each for the various
courses they took education Minister Dr
Mahendra ready reminded the graduates
that they need to fill the Gap due to
the demand and supply of skilled workers
he says a lot can be done to further
strengthen the
program we must ensure that the
apprentices and placements are in the
relevant field in order for students to
graduate in the area we must ensure that
the students are supervised at all times
and portfolios are properly assessed by
both house supervisors as well as
University attachment
officers British High Commissioner to
Fiji rodri Drummond says he will leave
Fiji with the fondest of memories and
will most likely return in the future
Maggie Bo with the
story calling on the president for the
last time High Commissioner Drummond
says the Fiji experience has been
indelible it's been a a time of uh great
positive change
uh in Fiji and a time when we've managed
to revive a lot of the links uh between
the UK and Fiji uh that uh that are so
important to many people not just
between governments but between people
uh and it's been a very pleasing time to
be here I've uh really enjoyed it
beginning he's posting in 2013 drumond
says he seen fi go through a number of
progressive changes when I arrived uh
preparations were just starting um for
the elections about a year ahead and uh
uh I was very determined that we would
play um a helpful positive role uh to
help support uh those happen uh and we
did uh and we've continued to uh support
uh the parliament it's a bit of sweet
goodbye trading in the official
residents's million dooll view for an
often wet London but drumman says he and
his family will definitely return those
Smiles that
Hospitality um the uh that feeling of
being welcomed into people's community
by the the vanua uh is really really
special um as well as the the scenic
Beauty the successor Melanie Hopkins
will be the first British woman to serve
in Fiji she's expected to present her
credentials to the president next month
Magie Bole FBC news turning to world
news Italy has declared a state of
emergency in the Region's worst hit by
Wednesday's earthquake as hopes of
finding more survivors fade at least 250
people are now known to have died and
365 were injured we turn to sports now
here's Jamie with the latest thanks zi
and good evening and sports after the
break surprise results on the first day
of
B and huge turnout expected at Fiji car
club event on Sunday this is more coming
[Music]
up
radio
radio2 radio
fi2
[Music]
only five of the 13 member National Sev
team were part of the national Victory
celebrations in lambasa today Elanor
Tangi reports this however did not deter
the public from turning up in the
thousands to meet their national
heroes nippy halfback Jerry
TW CH Mala Captain o and the gentle
giant joh nakarawa represented the
winning seven team to Rio in lambasa
today Captain Courageous o kin
apologized on behalf of those that
couldn't make it today I'd like to
apologize on behalf of uh the management
and the players I know you expected all
the team uh to be here and uh I ask for
your forgiveness cuz most of the boys
have H commitment with contracts and uh
they're leaving either this weekend and
uh on Monday
with maternal links to mwata Kin also
thanked the public for the huge turnout
today to all the people that stand out
here I told the boys that when we were
in Rio and at the medal Podium did we
really win a gold medal it doesn't feel
like that we want a gold medal and when
we came home it's sing that we really
wanton a gold medal seeing the support
from uh all the people the support from
sua and nandi and now the supporting
people in vu
and giving credit where it's due Kisa
also used the opportunity to thank the
other seven players who didn't make the
cut to real for their enormous
contribution to the team speaking on
behalf of Coach Ben Ryan who was also
absent from the celebration in lambasa
today team manager roati kesi says the
journey to Rio was full of
Miracles this team is a team of Miracles
that final we
played was a game of Miracles
and I thank Our Father in heaven for
watching over us from here only time
will tell what happens to the boys but
for many of them it will be back to
family life before another seven season
starts elen FBC
Sports meanwhile in the Inc Mobile
Battle of the Giants currently being
played at raka Park in laori laa
football is currently leading lambasa by
four goals to one here the match
highlights they're waiting and listening
for the railw commentary as loka going
to attack naatu it goes natu as they
races through and
natu elison's kick this time a better
kick and Leon Damu sneaks in the Yow to
deasa box till Mohammad shazil and
Mohamad shazil working on his
own in comes the kick headed away and
then followed through and slammed Inu
squares it to penny finow finow with a
chance now and finow smacks it in to
make it for goals to
one gal Sila came from behind to hold
NTI 4 All In The Opening match of the B
inor today D Pia scored twice while Asel
Raju and S Wanga Ned a goal each Sil
played catch up throughout with Shi
Hughes netting two while Samuel and runu
and Kelvin nidu added a goal each NTI
plays nand in his second match at 1:
p.m. tomorrow while SAA meets Rea at 700
p.m.
B has got off winning start beating
Nanda one- nil in its opening B match
B's lone goal came in the first half
through mvalo nakama the Men in Black
for the runners up in the tournament
last year losing to Rea 2-0 in the
final B plays La TOA in the in its
second match at 5:00 p.m.
tomorrow the Fiji car club is looking
forward to another exciting race at the
nanuku a STP in town noo on Sunday Fiji
car club president hanif says they
expect 40 to 50 cars to take part since
they have added two new categories one
is for the ladies and the other for
hybrid cars hanif says that the quarter
mile drag wars will be interesting
because For the First Time officials
will be able to time the cars the club
is trying to raise its standards and
provide better races for drivers and
Spectators we left another four after
this so it's going to exciting times for
f club we have just received a big
sponsorship from um Pacific Energy worth
$225,000 the weather is looking great so
it should be a um good day come Sunday
and if you want to see the action be
there at 10: Sunday morning that's it
from sports tonight good
[Music]
evening fiji's balance of payments has
improved due to a drop in Imports a
report from the Bureau of Statistics
shows the balance on the current and
capital account deficit it has narrowed
to $136 million in 2015 an increase in
tourism earnings and remittances also
helped in this regard the balance on
financial account deficit narrowed to
just over $530 million due to increase
in currency and
[Music]
deposits it was a bright sunny day apart
from a few clouds drifting across a
clear blue sky Suba was the coolest
recording 28° followed by nandi laoka
and savusavu at 29 lambasa a warm 31°
for tomorrow sunny periods with few
clouds is forecasted around Fiji looking
further ahead to Sunday the sunny spell
with cool winds likely to continue at
Sea East to Northeast winds gusting up
to 25 knots expect rough
[Music]
Seas recapping the main stories for
tonight Northern Division joins in
Olympic gold medal celebrations as
members of the Fiji 7th team visit
lambasa women dominate graduation
numbers at USP and British High
Commissioner rodri Drummond prepares to
leave Fiji as his posting comes to an
end for these stories and others you can
tune in Daily to our sister radio
station gold FM onto our poll question
for this week we are asking should Kini
be the future Sev coach to answer visit
our FBC
website you've been watching FBC news
I'm Jackie Spade from the team and I
have a safe and enjoyable weekend
[Music]
Mamba Mrs man ra from B uh I love
listening to gold FM only the classic
hits I'm s from
vatola I only listen to gold only the
classic
kidsa I'm Val and I'm working at Golden
Resort and I love listening to
because it plays a really wide range of
classic music I'm Sak from
kashmira I like gold FM the only the
classic hits gold FM only the classic
hits